# Deployd Design Doc

**Date:** 2017-02-24
**Maintainer:** Philip Lombardi

Deployd simplifies deployment of microservices and their associated infrastructure.

## High Level Problem

Every software as a service ("SaaS") company in the world builds an internal platform as a service ("PaaS") whether they realize it or not. No matter if a developer is working for MomPopSoft or the most advanced Silicon Valley unicorn that company has either built something they consider an internal "platform" that developers interact with.

A good PaaS minimizes developers exposure to the operational infrastructure that lives beneath their code. Developers care about surface exposure to infrastructure rather than the mechanics of said infrastructure. For example, developers ask questions like "How do I get a PostgreSQL database" or "How do I upgrade a service?". In this regard developers are like ordinary workers attempting to fulfil tasks at hand and should not be thought of much differently from the 9-5 commuter who wants to know where the subway station is.

On the other hand system engineers care deeply about the mechanics of the systems they build and are responsible for maintaining. The critical problem system engineers often face is "How do I make this easy for developers?" Often, the answer is a deeply unsatisfying "It's not possible within our budget and time constraints". What ends up happening is that the internals of the PaaS that the system engineering team builds leaks to the developers because they cannot simplify it more. Often this takes the form of developers being exposed to tools such as Ansible, Terraform or CloudFormation.

Deployd is an evolution of the original [Pib](https://github.com/datawire/pib) project that attempts to do the following things:

* Deployd enables *developers* to specify the runtime configuration of a service in a YAML file.
* Deployd enables *systems engineers* to define the runtime configuration parameters exposed to developers.
* Deployd handles the mechanical work of provisioning and deployment.

### Team: <N> Developers, 1..2+ System Engineers

Some assumptions:

1. The system engineers know how to build the infrastructure fabric of their system.
2. There is quite possibly already a bunch of infrastructure built out (e.g. VPC's, subnets etc.).
3. Too much detail is exposed to the developers (e.g. developers have to think about low-level details about PostgreSQL rather than just asking for PostgreSQL v9.6)
4. The mechanics of provisioning are a detail that the systems engineers would prefer to not focus on because they're more interested in problems such as maintainability, security and performance.

### Team: <N> Developers, 0 System Engineers

Some assumptions:

1. Incentivized to ship working features that increase business for the company.
2. Do not want to be bothered by the mechanics of deployment of their code or the underlying infrastructure that is needed.
3. Want to be able to use off the shelf hosted solutions for systems like databases if possible.
4. Do want a system that can adapt easily to change in requirements or scope.

## Deployd Theory (really simple)

Deployd primarily operates around the concept of a "World" which is a logically defined operational environment. A world is a logical containment mechanism for services that developers write and the infrastructure that they consume. Each world has machinery for handling service provisioning and infrastructure management.

A developers interface to Deployd looks like below (rough draft):

```yaml
---
"@_deployd_version": 1

worlds:
  - develop

service:
  name: hello

docker:
  registry: docker.io
  image: datawire/deployd-hello-demo
  tag: 1

requires:
  - postgresql96
```

When a service update comes into Deployd what happens is as follows:

1. The above YAML document is parsed.
2. Deployd is checked to see if all the "worlds" specified exist (in this case `develop`)
3. Deployd for each defined world begins to process the `requires` section.

### Requirements (`requires`) and Deployment

A requirement is a resource that **MUST BE** satisfied before service deployment can succeed. In the above YAML the developer has asked for a PostgreSQL 9.6 database "postgresql96". No parameters have been provided but Deployd knows how to get the developer a database. Behind the scenes a system engineer has written some configuration (currently Terraform) that converts that opaque string into a complete infrastructure definition.

Deployd goes off and deploys the necessary infrastructure and then marks the requirement satisfied before moving onto the next requirement. When all requirements are satisfied then Deployd generates the necessary Kubernetes configs to deploy the actual container.

Information needed by the container such as database server URL, username and password are all injected into the containers that will be deployed by Kubernetes.
